Good morning.
Morning.
Just while we're getting ourselves settled in, I will introduce.
We have an hour hearing with you as the New Zealand Institute of Skills and
Technology.
We would love to have some opening remarks, if you could keep that brief because we
do have a lot of questions, and we will need to break just prior
to 9 o'clock as we need to be in the house.
Perfect.
So I'll hand over to you now and thank you very much for being here.
Yeah, thank you. Good morning. Tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou katoa.
Katie and committee members, lovely to see you all again.
Good.
I'm Sue McCormack, the acting chair, and today I have with me our CEO, Gus
Gilmore, and our CFO, James Smith.
I will try and not talk for too long.
But we are very pleased to be here this morning with you and to
talk about the 2025 year in review for the New Zealand
Institute of Skills and Technology.
We've been under the radar for most of the year, you probably would've noted, and
we stayed out of media attention, which is always a good thing.
And we believe this is because we have been successful in achieving the minister's
expectations.
Since the last government's directive to establish Te Pūkenga and this
government's directive for disestablishment of what is now
NZIST, the governors and management of
NZIST have had one main goal above all others,
and that is notwithstanding the scale and complexity of change, we wanted
to ensure the success of our ākonga.
That was our main thing we wanted to achieve.
We wanted to maintain continuity and quality in vocational education
delivery, and we succeeded.
We increased completion and credit achievement rates, reaching our highest
levels and making a third consecutive year of improvement.
Importantly, equity in course completion for Māori and Pacific
ākonga reached an all-time high with very good improvements in credit
achievement equity as well.
Student wellbeing and satisfaction also remained strong, continuing a
three-year trend of excellent outcomes.
Throughout this time, our network demonstrated real strength.
I consider our ākonga's success reflects the professionalism,
resilience, and commitment of our educators and support staff.
I want to highlight our people who maintained continuity and quality
during this time and continue to deliver high-quality
vocational education to our 215,000
ākonga while preparing for a new future.
While progressing the significant task of ridding 10 of our polytechs and
all of our work-based learning business divisions to exit
NZIST,
we accelerated work on cost reduction and viability
measures to support these 10 ITPs to operate
independently.
This included reviewing, and in some cases, closing programs,
rationalizing the property portfolio, and right-sizing the
workforce at each division.
During this transitional period, we continued to invest in future capability
through our partnership with Apple, now in its third year,
strengthening digital fluency in kura and schools.
Through this micro-credential, we reached more than 5,000 learners,
engaged 22 kura in schools, and supported over 100 teachers in the
first two years.
In international education, we saw continued growth.
In 2025, student numbers increased 10%, and
revenue 13%.
Engagement through the prime ministerial trade missions to India and China resulted
in new agreements that will support future growth through joint
programs, research collaboration, and exchange opportunities.
All of this has been achieved while meeting our ongoing corporate obligations and
deliberately reducing the size of our national office as functions
transition back to business divisions or are concluded.
It remains essential we retain sufficient capability to meet
compliance and ministerial expectations as we wind down the organization.
We also marked an important cultural moment by returning the name Te Pūkenga to
Manawhenua, honoring the Māori that had guided us
and all those who had carried our collective kaupapa to that
point. We would like to reiterate our gratitude to our iwi
partners who supported us from across the
moatu. As the year closed, a major milestone was
reached with the successful transition of the 10 polytechs and all work-based
learning divisions of the NZIST
on 1 January 2026.
This reflects an enormous effort across the network, and again, I want to
acknowledge the dedication of our staff and the support of our partners in
achieving a smooth transition.
Looking ahead in 2026 is another critical year.
We're preparing our four remaining polytechs to exit NZIST on
1 January 2027, while planning for
NZIST formal disestablishment by 31 March
2027.
Until then, we remain committed to minimizing disruption to our ākonga and
ensuring each organization is set up for long-term
success. In closing, I'd like to
reiterate that without the Dixon Street lease commitment, which was made
in 2014, we would have achieved a $22
million surplus in 2025, compared to a $16
million surplus in 2024.
So despite the considerable demands of the past year, the story of
2025 is a positive one.
Our people have continued to deliver for our konga while navigating
significant change, and together we have laid a strong
foundation for the future of vocational education in our Aotearoa New
Zealand.
Thank you for your time this morning, and we look forward to any questions you may
have.
Thank you very much. And can I just firstly say, as the MP for Napier, I'm very
pleased to be able to welcome EIT back into the community.
So thank you for the work you've done on that.
We have a first question from Vanessa Nguyen.
Thank you very much, Janet, and thank you so much for the work that you've done.
Yeah.
Can you tell the committee what has been some of the key requirements
to be able to get the success and the achievement outcomes
that you've had? What have, what has been the
operational things that have led to that?
Yeah, sure. Thank you.
There's been a number,
and the primary focus has been on
an end-to-end journey for students.
So right when they first enrolled,
simplification of the enrollment process.
And then
once they're enrolled, formal welcoming, setting them up with
technology, setting them up with academic support, helping
those with English as second language navigate that
challenging environment in an academic setting right
through to ongoing workshops, pastoral care,
student groups, clubs. As much as we can to provide
wraparound and to have our students feel
included. And then in the workplace learning environment,
again, another big focus, particularly in the pastoral care.
We've seen a number of students, in 2024
and 2025,
reporting mental health issues,
and we provided substantial support in that area with the help of Tu Wh
Cat order,
four odd million dollar
investment last year. We saw that service picked up a
lot by our konga and apprentices and trainees.
So
there are a number of initiatives.
There's no silver bullet in this
area,
but as you can see from the results, we've seen some really strong
improvement. And although the percentage point change is
small, that translates to thousands of students, given the
size of our student base,
215 odd thousand students in the system each year.
Great. Thank you so much.
Right. Next question from Shannon Halbert.
Kia ora. E mihi ana ki a koutou katoa. Nau mai, haere mai.
Thanks very much for joining us this morning.
My first question is around work-based enrollments.
I'm interested in sort of the changes that we've sort of seen between
2024, 2025, and a bit of an
explanation around that.
Yeah. Work-based enrollments a bit, are a bit different
to campus base in the sense that they more or less run with the
economy. So when our economy is typically soft and
unemployment's a bit higher,
there's typically less trainees going into the workplace.
And that's both in terms of lower level programs, but
also four-year apprenticeships. So that's the key driver.
Plus also, obviously, with a number of firms
making some difficult decisions around staffing numbers in the last 12
months as well, that's obviously impacted on the number of
employees they allowed to go into training.
So does that mean that there wasn't demand
for people to take up work-based learning?
No, there was definitely still demand.
It was just lower than some of the previous years.
And that cyclical nature moving with the economy, changes
in the economy is the major driver.
And so if there was demand, was there extra funding
requested
to TEC
to offer these places?
Yeah. The bulk of work-based learning is in
levels three to seven
in the qualifications framework.
There was more than sufficient funding to cover demand in 2025.
In fact, we returned some funding back to the Tertiary Education
Commission
because the demand was softer than previously budgeted.
And so if we then look at
YG
level one and two,
was there scope to deliver higher numbers in that area then?
Definitely.
YG and foundation learning at levels one and two
is always oversubscribed, and the demand's
been great. And particularly in foundation where we
see a number of young people leaving the high school
system without levels two and
three qualifications, which are really important for getting
employment, obviously. So the demand's been high, and
it was high last year as well.
Yeah. And so what was that demand?
The demand,
we exceeded our budgeted allocation for level one and
two.
So I think there was unsatisfied demand.
It's quite hard to put your finger on exactly what that number was,
but anecdotally across the country, there was strong demand,
particularly in places like South Auckland, East Coast of the North
Island,
to name a few.
But also in the South Island, in Otago
region had demand, and also Nelson Marlborough
Māori Pacific Trades Training is another example where-
Yeah
... there's incredible demand.
Was that demand funded? Was it requested?
The funding, as a total percentage of our funding, it's a
relatively low number.
But the allocation was all consumed.
Sorry, I didn't address your question around YG.
Again, really strong demand in YG,
and it was great to see in this budget, the government announced more
places for YG, and I have no doubt that the
system won't consume it all.
Sure.
We will use every last YG place.
Are you able to give me a number of the demand-
Yeah, my colleague is-
Again-
... is looking up the numbers as we speak
...
There were a lot of last questions
. That's cool. We're always happy to follow up-
Thank you
... after hearing, so thank you. Supplementary question from Jan Tinetti.
Yes, thank you, and look, thank you for that overview right at the beginning.
It's really heartening to hear the work and the successes that you've had
in the last couple of years, and that always was the
dream to see those successes and hear of them.
My sup on what my colleague was saying here is
that vocational education has always been subject and
influenced very much by market conditions at the time.
Mm-hmm.
So as you say, the work-based learning
is
down at the moment because of economic conditions, but we also know that
it goes very much the other way, but also the face-to-face learning and the campus
learning. How do you plan, how have you planned for that
and been able to sustain that? Because that can be really significant
in just even in one year, that change can be really significant.
Yeah. I think there's kind of three drivers here.
Obviously, we've talked about the economy, a major driver.
The second one is government priorities, so the government's
initiatives and investment in areas of vocational
education in terms of funding
stimulates demand. And we've seen some really good examples
of that. Two or three years ago, we saw quite a focus by the then
government on work-based learning
apprenticeships. We saw a big growth in numbers.
We've seen in the last two years quite a good investment by the
current government,
in the likes of YG, Foundation One and Two, and
other initiatives. So that's also a key driver.
And then I think obviously is
the labor market and regional labor market demand, and
that's quite a fickle thing to forecast.
Mm-hmm.
And I wouldn't say we've always got it right, but we've had a reasonably
good steer. In fact, what we're seeing right now at the moment, the
greatest demand is in that level seven degree programs and above.
And we are all looking for additional funding in
that space. I think as students and their
whanau realize that more skills and
upskilling is really important-
Mm-hmm
... that we're seeing quite an increase in demand for degree programs.
So it does even flow a bit, as you quite
rightly say, Jan.
Yeah.
And it is challenging to forecast, but so far we've navigated
that reasonably well.
Yeah. Cool. Thank you.
Great. You've got the next primary, Jan Tinetti.
Next primary.
One of the areas that I'm really interested in is with
the devolvement out into the different areas, what that's
meant to the labor market within
your organization, and number of jobs
that may have been lost or not.
And how that's hit regionally as well.
Yeah.
First of all, I think in terms of
the restructuring within the sector,
I think one of the really positive things that's come from it is
there's been a reset of the numbers to
ensure that those entities are viable in the medium term.
Yeah.
And unfortunately, it was quite an impact on our people.
There was 500 odd people made redundant
in 2025. Not all of them in 2025, but some from
2024 as well. Obviously, it has an impact in
some regional economies.
But I think it's fair to say it was a necessary move too, as we
stood up those independent entities in their regions, that they were
viable and could weather those
economic ebbs and flows that we see typically in a normal year.
So,
yeah, it was very regrettable, and no one enjoys or takes any
heart from doing that.
No.
But it was an important thing to reset.
One of the areas that I'm interested in
is how it has hit the little regions and whether that's
proportionate to the bigger regions.
And why I say that is I remember visiting last year
Toi Ohomai's campus in Tokoroa, and I know that they, I think
they kept going, but at that time there was a lot of uncertainty.
Yeah.
And I thought that was going to hit their little town, if that did
go ahead, very much so. And so it's made me wonder about what's
happening in some of those other smaller regions, whether that is...
I said disproportionate.
Mm.
Get my words right. Disproportionate to what's happening in the bigger regions or
bigger cities maybe.
Mm-hmm.
Do you have a sense of that?
The scale for us, and in a little town like
Tokoroa, the scale for us is very small.
I think that would impact more around those bigger
employers closing plants and mills-
Mm
... as opposed to the impact of vocational on
the local economy.
Yeah. I guess it wasn't only that. And sorry to interrupt.
Please, yeah.
It wasn't only that, it was the fact that that campus-
Was an amazing campus.
Sure.
And
that was going to be, if it happened, that was going to be-
Yeah
... a big loss to that whole town to lose that.
And I was thinking the likes of Greymouth, of different
places like that.
Yes.
Where those places are-
Yeah
... integral-
Agree
... to the town. And so the people are integral, and the place.
Sure.
Yeah. So just a sense, if you've got one or maybe-
Well, we obviously tried to minimize that across the network.
Yeah.
But there was impact, and
we do recognize the impact on those local economies.
What was most important, and although the bricks and mortar might
have been closed and changed, as part
of the work we did in the restructuring around those local economies,
we made sure that the training continued.
So, one of the hidden
training in our sector is work-based learning.
There aren't bricks and mortars because people are on site, they're in a workplace,
they're in a manufacturing plant, they're on a farm-
Mm
... they're in a mill, they're somewhere else,
and that learning had continued. For example, in
Greymouth, there are many providers. We love Tai Poutini.
Yes. So do I .
Should I say, we all do. But there are also a number of other
providers-
Mm
... offering vocational education and training.
So hopefully, unfortunately if our Tai Poutini operation
shrinks, the training continues-
I think just on-
... by other providers
... I think that just on that point, Jan, that you're making, there probably is
going to be a bit of an
issue in the town like for Tai Poutini.
I have a friend, a district court judge, and she often referred people to
the institution just to kind of give them that second chance, and
when I was talking her through the process that was going to happen there.
It's not going to be so easy to do that.
So there was kind of like a bit of a backfall from a judicial point of view just-
Yeah.
But it's still available, still can do, but-
Yeah
... obviously the smaller, the more difficult.
Yeah.
That is probably... And they're isolated too, so they're, yeah.
And I'm only using that one because I am a coaster, so
Thank you.
Just a supplementary on that question.
In terms of those sort of more isolated communities or lower
population communities,
how have you found this last process that you're going through with
balancing those communities and that need for representation and
service with the commercial viability aspect?
Yeah. Well, it's tough, isn't it?
It absolutely is a balancing act and
it's challenging, it really is.
Yeah.
And given the way we're funded, we're funded by students
coming in our gates-
Right
... and into our workplaces, and our environments.
If our students aren't there, and those young people have left those regions,
then unfortunately we had to make some of those difficult calls around
the training provision. And this is where
the online and blended learning environment also comes into play,
where there are options. So if a course isn't physically being delivered on the
ground in a region,
there's the opportunity for students to study online.
And I think we all acknowledge not all students flourish
online.
Mm.
But a number do, and we've seen some good results through the Open Polytechnic-
Mm
... and other providers inside our network doing a good job in that space with
strong demand.
Great. Thank you. Our next primary question is from Pamshit Prammer.
Thank you. My question is about the numbers of students that you budgeted
for, domestic and international.
Mm-hmm.
So I see that the actual numbers were less than what you
budgeted for.
So the domestic students decreased by
2.5% compared to 2024. And international students,
the increase was not as it...
I mean, you budgeted for 17%, but it grew by
7.5.
Yeah.
So I want to understand what was behind what was
put in the budget, and what were the
reasons why that was not achieved for both domestic and
international?
Sure. So in terms of the inter-- If we start with the international-
Sure
... numbers, which is the primary
variance. The key impact there is
we're all trying to grow back to pre-COVID numbers at a business
division level or a new entity level.
So it was a bit of a informed budget around,
these are the relationships we have with different
agents and different in-country provision
partners.
And the expectation was that we would get to a certain number through the
budget round.
Unfortunately, that didn't eventuate. There are a couple of factors there.
The first one is really just around
how we sell ourselves, and as Sue mentioned at the
start of the session,
we have been able to gain more
agreements with providers and partners,
but they take time. And so some business divisions were a
little bit optimistic around the timing of when some of those, the
pipeline would come through. And I think that's probably one of the key
issues around international,
is just understanding the length of time it takes to actually
cultivate the relationships to a point where the students
start to come through.
So that's really the primary issue in the international space.
On the domestic side, as we've discussed,
the demand at DQ7 plus, the degree stuff,
that's been building over the last few years and we're now kind
of at the peak where we've had multiple years of strong year one
enrollments and degree programs.
So that demand's not going to soften off
immediately.
That has now got one more year to go-
As Gus said, in the domestic side, the
drop-off really has been in that three to seven space.
That's what's really fallen down.
And for last year, that was primarily in the work-based learning business
divisions. So that's the natural reason for the
decline in that space, and us being slightly behind last year,
91,000 Es versus 92,000 Es.
Yeah. So when did you become aware that you will
not be able to meet those targets and budgets?
And what was done to ensure, like-
Yeah, so-
... what was happening behind the scenes-
Yeah, so we-
... so that you're doing everything possible to meet what is in the-
So we basically were moving to a rolling forecast every
month. We did two substantive bottom-up
forecasts through the year.
There you go.
But all of that was also
dovetailing into both the
return to ITP viability and the work-based learning viability
reviews that we were undertaking through the year to get everyone ready for this
year, the stand-up, on January 2026.
So we had a constant focus on
the Es and the enrollment patterns throughout the year.
We were making adjustments, and trying to
incentivize where we can, enrollments,
and working with employers to try and understand what their demands
were going to be for 2025,
and flowed that through our financial forecasting throughout the year.
Okay. Thank you.
Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you. I'm interested in how you mentioned in the
opening statement around the
rationalization of courses.
Uh-huh.
What was the sort of total net
change in the courses that were being offered across the network over this period?
We had approximately 250
programs closed or paused.
And that number ebbed and flowed a bit during the year as we went through
consultation with-
Mm
... the various stakeholder groups.
And
a number of those programs that were closed weren't
being taught in that year as well.
Right.
So they were programs sitting on the shelf, which may or may not have been
consuming resource. So there was quite a tidy up around a number
of the business divisions' program portfolios.
And as part of the disestablishment of NZICT Te Pūkenga,
we had
moved local decision-making back to where
those programs were being delivered.
So the teams around the country were looking at the demand
in their region and in the area and making calls around whether or not they would
close. But
approximately 215 programs closed or paused.
Is there a trend in
where those courses tended to be lost?
Did more programs sort of disappear
from the more regional polytechs or were they concentrated in the city
ones?
What broad trends have been identified in the sort of courses?
No, no obvious trends-
Okay
... regional versus metro city
campuses and programs.
One thing I would say, and one thing we've seen as a system, is the
decline in business programs.
Mm.
So business programs across the board have been in decline probably for
over a decade now.
Mm.
And that trend continued as well. And I think, that's just a
function of where people source their
education, and there's so many different options online
and
available. So
some of those trends continued.
A supplementary, Grant McCallum.
Yeah, thanks. Just on this topic,
when you say that the dissolution of, disestablishment, sorry,
of Te Pūkenga has allowed basically, and the
reestablishment of the local
institutes, has allowed them to really reassess those courses in terms of
like-- because it's very easy just to keep rolling on.
Yeah.
And suddenly you had the opportunity, well, we've got to make this work.
Right.
Let's really take a look under the hood here and see what the students really want
to learn, and the numbers.
Yeah.
Mm.
And the viability.
Yeah.
We want to set them up for success.
Mm.
So part of that process was ensuring that
that's part of it.
Yeah.
And I think one of the key learnings, and particularly in your region, Grant-
Yeah
... is going back to stakeholders.
Yeah.
Reengaging deeply with the high schools and larger employers-
Mm
... and the community groups that we've been engaging with, and really
understanding what they needed rather than what we were delivering.
Yeah. So that's vital. Thank you.
Yeah.
All right. Thank you. Jan Tinetti. Right, supplementary.
A supplementary on that, in the program delivery.
You mentioned right at the beginning around the partnership with Apple, and I
remember other partnerships being signed too, like with Air New Zealand
and down in Marlborough. I remember going to the opening of that.
And part of that at the time was that the then Te
Pūkenga was the big entity that those places were able to
sign with.
Are those programs able to continue in the new entities?
Yeah. Well, we've got that answer from you just yesterday.
Yeah. So the answer is yes. It all comes back to who is now the lead
provider-
Mm-hmm
... working in syndication with the remaining partners.
Yeah.
Yeah. So we're definitely aiming to try and maintain all of those relationships
into the new solution.
Is there potential then for
new partnerships to be signed and
formed?
I hope so, would be my answer. But there's-
Part of the difference, I suppose now, is the collaboration that
was enabled with one.
Yeah.
That now it's become competitive back in the regions.
And so it's really up to the-
Cs and chairs to think how they could possibly remain and have some of that
collaboration.
Mm.
Because there is something in the whole-
Mm
... that would actually good for all of them.
So it's really on their, they're now on their own, so it's up to
them to try and-
Mm
... work that through and see if they can.
Mm. Yeah.
Okay.
Supplementary Grant-
Just, just on this.
Yep.
That's been my experience, actually.
I've, as, as part of the whole North Tech restructure,
I've spoken to a couple of other
polytechs around the country, and they, and they're very much of the, of the mind,
"Well, yeah, well, yes, we may be separate institutions, but we're, we're
happy to advise and work together on programs and that sort of..." That's certainly
been my experience.
Mm. Uh, no question?
No.
Oh, okay.
Just-
Shannon.
I mean, Grant-
I didn't get a-
Grant, one, one thing that would be really helpful was-
Yeah
... some policy to incentivize that.
Mm-hmm.
So we, we've gone back to settings that don't necessarily
incentivize collaboration.
Mm-hmm.
So I think it'd be really helpful to put some policy
around that to really encourage, uh-
Okay
... the new entities to work together. But having said that, they are talking.
Yeah.
It's just-
That's been my experience
... it's early doors. It's just early doors.
Yeah. No worries.
Uh, supplementary, Shannon Halbert.
Yeah, thanks. So I'm just interested in
the transition of those partnerships, because then we see the
example with Ara
that's sort of fallen by the wayside, which was quite an innovation from Te
Pukenga. So, have you given any advice on how
we transition those partnerships, what that
looks like, and how
we ensure that they are maintained?
It's, it's the management of the stakeholder relationship.
Yeah.
And we are, like for example, we are in negotiations with Apple
at the moment for subsequent years' delivery.
Mm-hmm.
And it's really looking after those relationships and reassuring
them that although NZIST finishes
end of March next year,
there are lots of options, and the same people on the ground
are about. They might have a working for a different employer
and, and in a region, but the, the, the delivery can,
can continue. But it's a bit clunky.
Are there any learnings we can take from the other example?
I think there's a lot of learnings.
And
we've done quite a bit of work in detailing
some of the upside of a centralized national
delivery, uh, in vocational education.
Uh, um, and I don't want to get political on this at all.
Mm.
I just want to focus on, where are the future opportunities,
and collaboration is definitely one.
Mm.
We've seen that.
Not repeating things 16 times-
Yeah
... or 25 times.
Yeah.
And working together to, to provide scale.
But there's some things that aren't scalable and work best in local
regions as well.
Mm.
So, you kind of take the best of, of, of both.
And just sort of how we did do like a little legacy learning
document, um, successes and lessons and opportunities, which we made
available to all the individual polytechs.
So they've got what we learned from-
Absolutely
... good and bad, and hopefully they can actually,
use that as a tool in terms of moving some of that stuff forward.
There you go, polytechs, if you're watching.
Here's the document.
It's all on you.
Uh, Francisco Hernandez, you had a, um- Supplementary ... supplementary.
I'll ask first. Oh, perfect. Okay.
Well, we have a new primary from Shannon Halbert.
Thank you. So I just wondered, so you, you talked
about supporting the transition of the remaining
polytechnics, and I wondered if you can just talk me
through what, what work has been done with the final few,
um, in helping them transition,
um, before the 1st of January next year?
And we'll go from there.
I, I think, Shannon, first point is probably the, the
remaining four are probably the ones who have a number of
challenges around their financial viability.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, that's why, um-
Yeah
... the government made the decision to keep them inside
NZIST for another year. Uh, um, the work that we
started in 2025, uh, um, around some
of the stuff we've been discussing this morning, reviewing program portfolios,
um, reviewing campus sizes, reviewing
utilization across their campuses, et cetera, et cetera, is
ongoing. Um, but our focus primarily in the next
six months is to transition them, and quite
detailed individual, um,
uh, uh, polytech plans have been drafted.
Uh, um, they should be signed off by our, our council very soon,
um, and then they'll go to the TC commissioners for approval.
And that's the formal document that details the process between now and
the 1st of January for them to transition.
Uh, um,
i- in terms of, in terms of their progress, their progress has been
really good. Uh, um, all, all of the four
polytechs has l- have leaned quite heavily into the work that's
required to stand up.
Mm.
They've had some good financial assistance from the government, um, via
the TEC, uh, to do that as well. Um,
and, um, uh, perhaps with the ex- exception of one,
most are on track to transition effectively from the 1st of
January.
Thank you. Are there any clear risks that you've identified in that
transitional process? And which polytechnics do they pertain
to?
Yeah, there, there are a number of risks.
Um, some we touched on, um, this morning around the
demand picture. Um, it is quite fickle.
Mm.
In fact, um- Our current
enrollment picture for 2026 is slightly behind
our budget.
We're seeing softness across the board generally.
And as James said, particularly in that traditional
vocational space of levels three to seven.
International is challenging at the moment, getting
visas approved on time so we can start students at the beginning of
their semester has been challenging.
And the polytechs and all of the sector have been
working closely with Immigration New Zealand to address
that
and advocate for
their polytech through.
There is substantial risk around longer term
viability. So making sure that we're
doing all of the hard yards now to set them up for success
from 2027 and beyond is
the key piece of work.
But as I say, that's progressing.
And do you expect further
job cuts and campus closures as a
result of that rationalization exercise?
Is that part of your recommendation?
So, there's two bits to that.
The first bit is business as usual.
So every year we look at the demand picture, we look at the number of students we
have on our books, and we make decisions around program viability, as Sue
was referring to as well. So that happens every year.
So every year we do unfortunately see some
changes. And then this year and last year was a
bit of an exception as we take a reset around longer term
viability. So it's hard for me to say emphatically yes, there will be more,
but there will be some consultation and possibly there could be further
job loss.
Okay. A supplementary question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Just in this space,
with NorthTec,
the government's invested quite a bit into that.
How's
that progressing from your viewpoint?
Yeah.
Thank you.
James.
Yeah, it's going well.
Yeah.
So
we've got a very good working relationship with TEC.
Mm.
We're very clear on what the requirements are,
both in terms of the operating model for NorthTec-
Mm
... to deliver the educational outcomes.
But also, the other aspect being the
single stage business case that we're now in the process of preparing-
Yeah
... around their property footprint.
So-
Mm
... we're very confident that we'll get that business case completed
to the timeline that we've agreed with the TEC.
So everything's on track in that space.
That's great. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. A primary question from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thanks very much for the work you guys have been doing
through this process. One of the previous conversations we've had a bit of a
discussion about is the compliance activity for our tertiary sector, particularly
with TEC. Gus, you'll remember well.
Interested firstly, has there been any
improvement in that relationship and that
expectation of clients reporting?
The first point is there's been good discussion.
Post last year's select committee, we had two or three meetings
with TEC around that and presented a
paper on where the opportunities were.
There has been some improvement, and that work is
ongoing.
So do you see further opportunity for that
compliance burden where it's not delivering valuable outcome
for end user educational-
Yeah
... achievement to be reduced?
I think so. Candidly, yes.
And obviously it's a balance for TEC around having
good stewardship over taxpayer money.
Yeah.
But also, that balance of pulling out unnecessary
reporting and compliance,
I think is still an opportunity, and we'll continue to engage with them on
that side.
Is that something that you would feel comfortable providing to the select
committee, either at this stage or a
further, "Here's our view," as you wind up next year?
Sure, we could do that. Absolutely. Yep.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Great.
It appears that that's all the questions we've got for you this morning, but can I
just say, this is probably the last time we're going to have a hearing with you .
Yeah.
So, thank you for working with our committee, for being open
with your processes and how things are going, and-
Mm
... very much of luck or best of luck for the wind-up process
and what you're doing to get those last few institutions-
Mm
... set up and going. So thank you.
Yeah. Thanks, Katie.
Yeah.
Well, we're doing our best. And yes, it's good to say goodbye, isn't it?
In some circumstances, yeah.
Thanks for the work in Northland too. Really appreciate it.
Yeah.
Really do.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thanks again.
Thanks.